Nishat Khan: Shri Mataji, it’s always a
special honour to be here, to play for you.
And we are very grateful to be invited.
And in a way, I invited myself this time,
to come and to play for you.
Because I know that Shri Ganesha
Puja is a very important puja.
And I want to play for you some compositions from
guru vandana [respect for elders?],
and so I will play, because of this time,
we still have light of the evening,
I will play raga Marva [Then Yaman].
[Concert]
[Starts at 1:08:26]
Nishat
Khan:
I’ve played many concerts but
I have never played Marwa.
I have never played Marwa for Shri Mataji,
because I wanted to play for very long time.
And when I arrived this evening,
somebody told me that Shri Mataji
has asked to play now, at 6:30.
I said in this light?
And I thought Shri Mataji knows.
So, I’m really happy that I got to play this
beautiful spiritual raga for you, Madam.
Shri Mataji: I must say,
apologize also,
that Nishat Khan had told me that he
would like to play on a Ganesha Puja.
I had agreed also.
But as you know the Swiss are very
particular about time.
They make all the watches.
[Laughter]
So, also we thought as there is very short time,
I felt that he may not be happy to
play for a short time something,
because he likes to play for a long period.
[Laughter]
But that’s our privilege.
But this time, as you know,
I have to go on Monday,
and I have not done yet my packing or anything.
And then from there, directly to Russia.
It’s going to be quite a fast
movement of marathon race of mine.
So, we just thought that we’d better get somebody
who is just coming up as a musician.
And then we can have such a
great artist like him later on
when he will have more time to play.
Especially, Marva is a raga
which I like the most, perhaps.
Because it is, as he says, it’s
very meditative and very deep.
And I remember first time, long, long time back,
Asad Ali [Khan] sahib was there and he had
invited me.
They had never seen.
And he was just playing some sort
of a Bengali tune to begin with.
And Sahaja Yogis told me that, “We were bored.
And we thought he’s better
stop, that will be better”.
It’s in the beginning.
And as soon as he saw me on the doorstep,
suddenly he told me his hand started moving.
And he played Marva.
My husband doesn’t like Marva.
Today only, first time
again, it’s the second time,
that this was real Marva here.
He, you see, he’s a –
No, no but something I must tell you that,
that Marva he started playing.
And after that, Asad Ali sahib
became a great artist also.
But that Marva, really, filled
me completely with vibrations.
He said, “Mother, I don’t know.
I knew all these things, but normally,
they don’t come to you easily.
But as soon as
you stand, I saw you standing there,
and my hand started moving on Marva”.
I said, “You made the whole
palace of Marva before me”.
I cannot also forget that Marva, as this one.
Because this is a raga very difficult, they say,
because you have to have spiritual depth.
Otherwise, you cannot play this.
And you all have enjoyed it.
Though commonly, people don’t like Marva so much.
But in Maharashtra it is
very, very much appreciated.
And also in Punjab, I must say that
the ragis always sing in Marvara.
So, it was very kind of you
to have chosen this raga.
Because – and you went into
a kind of a, I don’t know,
what we call sanchar, both of you.
Sanchar is some Ganesha entered into
them and started playing, I think.
The way they played was really very divine,
very beautiful, very remarkable.
And this raga is very fulfilling.
The way he has played, this is the second
time I am hearing such a nice Marva.
You see and because I know I’m very old
and I heard so many people singing this.
Long time back also, I heard
Abdul Karim Khan in Marva.
He was another one, he used to just
pull your strings of your heart,
as you feel it, the way he sang.
So, there are people who have been
singing and also playing Marva.
But playing Marva is not an easy
thing, I think, it’s easier to sing.
Nishat Khan: [Hindi].
Shri Mataji: [Hindi].
So, this two times I was, say, twice,
I have had this really thrilling
experience of such ascendance,
that the whole audience rises in spirituality.
It is a raga to be really
mastered and to be understood.
I’m happy you all have enjoyed it
because I don’t think you have heard Marva before,
anybody playing before you.
So, it was a very good choice.
Then our- another player is Sukhvinder Singh,
who is very well known all over, I tell you.
He said, “One thing I’ve missed in life”.
I said, “What?”
Tabla by Sukhvinder Singh.
Moreover, I have another relationship with him,
because Namdharis are the first
who entered into Sahaja Yoga.
Even in Taiwan and places like
that, these Namdharis came in
and they said, “Mother you are
doing what is predicted about you”.
They gave me writing from the Guru Gobind Singh,
where it is described in the
future, what will happen,
and how somebody will come and
give you Realization and all that.
That’s all with me.
So, I was very much touched by them.
Of course, now in Punjab,
you have many Sikhs who have become Sahaja Yogis.
Many, many Sikhs who have become Sahaja Yogis.
And Punjab, also, I went because they
came to Ganapatipule, some of them.
And they were just rolling on
the stage, you see, halfway.
And saying, “Mother, come
to Punjab, come to Punjab”.
And Punjab was a disturbed
area but then CP allowed me.
And now we have many Sikhs,
many, many Sikhs in Punjab,
in the sense that, in their
Chandigarh and also Rawalpindi.
All over, they have taken to Sahaja Yoga.
And I’m sure this will work
out, the peace in that country.
It has now. It is much better.
Punjab is the place where I studied
and I like Punjabis very much.
And I find now this movement of Sahaja
Yoga is so much appreciated by Sikhs,
as well as by Hindus.
And also some Muslims met me.
They called me in their village.
And they said, “Why? Why are we denied?
This is a promised in our Quran that we’ll
get Qiyama, we’ll get resurrection.
And why should you deny it?”
I said, “I didn’t. You should have come”.
So, the whole village was Muslim village.
And it worked out.
I tell you, it was so much of a assurance
that this world will come to that global
emancipation,
to that transformation, that there will be peace.
Without peace you can’t hear this music.
If there is no peace in your heart,
how can you enjoy this music?
You cannot play this music and you cannot enjoy.
Anything that is beautiful, you cannot
enjoy unless until there is peace.
And so, I’m going for this
mission of creating peace.
And I’m happy you all enjoyed it.
I must say that these artists
are very near the Divine
because the way they emit these
vibrations by which we feel so peaceful,
so relaxed and so much of the
Spirit, that is within you, shines.
So, it’s a very reciprocal activity
between the musicians
and all of you who are here and who are enjoying.
I don’t know every time, even Asad
Ali Khan says and he also says,
that in my presence, they can go into ecstasy.
Possibly. I don’t know.
But what I have got is a just a mother’s love.
And I feel these are my children who
are artists, and they have to come up.
They have to come up because they have
to give joy to all the people, pure joy.
And this is what you are
enjoying and I’m happy about it.
I’m sorry because of this time
limit, due to your watches, you see,
[Laughter]
we had to little bit
adjust it and he’ll play one more raga,
because we have other programs also.
[Hindi
conversation]
Sir C.P.:
It is quite true that Marva is not an easy raga to
appreciate.
And one must know music very well.
But I assure you that from today,
I have begun not only to like,
but become a devotee of Marva.
Sahaja Yoga means transformation.
And even in me, you have brought
about transformation for music today.
So, thank you very much it was excellent.
[Applause]
So, now, we’ll have another raga played by him
and which you all are enjoying as it is.
And he, they are now lost in the heavens, I think,
where, from where all these
beautiful renderings are coming.
And I don’t know how this rapport
is established and how it works out.
But more and more musicians must be encouraged
and you also should learn
music, I would say,
to appreciate this kind of thing.
It requires not only the practice, the ryas,
but also a spiritual help.
Otherwise, you don’t hear this kind of music.
This is some sort of a very
‘ruki kamale’ [unsure; Hindi]
Nishat Khan:
You know, sometimes, there are
some difficulties arising suddenly,
when I have to come.
But because of Mataji, somehow, it works out.
I’m very grateful.
Shri Mataji: No, no.
Nishat Khan: I’m very grateful.
Shri Mataji: You see, I wanted you to come
first because of the shortage of time.
Nishat Khan: This is the first
time I’m playing at 7:00 in the
evening for you.
[Laughter]
So, I have a chance to play
little Marva, little Yaman.
Shri Mataji: All these
ragas are to be played also.
Because you people start after 10:00,
so you just go with Jaijaivanti
and Malkauns and all that.
What about these ragas?
They have to be played.
We all must really thank Nishat Khan
and Sukhvinder Singh,
both of them very much,
for giving us such a great joy
great joy entertaining our Spirit.
Today, I was reminded of another
great musicians in India,
who played before me Yaman raga.
And you see, we must say that today is Shri
Ganesha’s birthday we are celebrating here.
And this is the first raga all
the musicians have to learn:
Yaman raga is the first
raga they all have to learn.
This is the Shri Ganesha, as they
say, Shri Ganesha of the music
starts with Yaman raga.
So, it was very appropriate
to play this raga here.
This raga, as I was telling you what
Parveen Sultana also sang before me.
She’s a very great artist, I must say,
and normally people said that she
becomes very shrill or something.
But no, she was excellent.
She sings so well and she’s such a
fast-moving person, Parveen Sultana.
But that day, it happened
that her harmonium player,
I know her because she was
working in Khadi Bhandar.
So, the harmonium player came and asked me,
“What have you done to this lady?
After every 5 minutes, she shouts at me normally.
But today, what have you done?
What magic you have created that she was
so silent and so beautifully singing and this.
And she also didn’t become that shrillness”.
Another brother of mine who is
a great connoisseur, he said,
“I’ve never heard this woman
singing so beautifully raga Yaman”.
And then one gentleman from
there came, shouted at her that,
“You sing a particular ghazal” which may
be little romantic side or whatever it is.
She said, “Do you know before whom I am I singing?
How could you ask such a thing!”
I was amazed at her.
She said, “Such a thing I can’t sing before this”.
So, you know, in the music
also, when they are playing,
I think they go into that realm of purity,
where they cannot stand anything impure or stupid.
This, I was so surprised at
her playing just a Yaman raga,
which is the basic, the child.
It is the child, the innocence of music.
Because the first raga you learn is this
and that as he sang was,
“Guru binaka esay gunaka he, Guru
namah neto gunaya we [unsure]”
It’s the one where they say that,
“Without the guru,
how can we get any virtues within us?
How can we get any qualities within us?”
And this is the first thing they have to learn,
that you have to be very obedient to your guru.
And I know everybody, all of them,
must have also
known their gurus have been
very, very strict people
and extremely meticulous, but
that’s why they are there.
It’s such a, at such an young age, I mean
to see such improvisation, permutations,
combinations of the music,
is something really out of the blue.
You cannot think because, I told
you, I’ve heard so many people,
but heard all of them after 45, 50 years of age.
They were not young people like you.
Despite that, you have not only
done such justice to this music,
but also what your forefathers
have given you, is a treasure.
I tell you, what your forefathers have given you,
there is no need for you
to make new tunes, nothing.
There, so much is there, so much!
And when you see there are 900
ragas which are they call ‘prasida’,
means are known to people and there
are so many which are unknown also.
Then these all bandishes, as he is singing,
every one of them they were so such geniuses,
that they created these beautiful ragas.
And the ragas also because
they also created the ragas,
not only that, they created
the themes and the bandish,
but also, they made it so much
sort of, one with the timing,
one with the idea.
Now for example, this Yaman raga,
which is to be learned first,
is the Shri Ganesha of music.
So, first thing is to respect your Guru.
And this is how they have made all the bandishes.
Very deep people, they are not cheap.
They were not for any sort of show
or they were not for any sort
of a money or power or anything.
Very, very
highly qualified. Very, very highly qualified.
I met few of them Alaudin kasab also, I met.
You see, and they’re very different people.
And they had no interest in money or anything
but they were sort of, you see, God
has created them to create music.
Special people, absolutely,
and very loving, very kind,
and extremely also very hot
tempered with their disciples.
And was very strict with them.
But the disciples had to agree and
had to accept what they are saying,
because they were like we
are: you are seeking truth,
they were seeking the mastery in music.
So, all the people had to
be very obedient, careful.
And I was myself surprised that in the Yaman Raga,
they have talked of the guru.
Because is the first raga,
to be sung first of all,
before learning any other raga.
First, you learn Yaman.
And it is a raga of today,
because today we are celebrating
Shri Ganesha’s birthday.
So, it’s all very timely
because you have done justice
to Marva and to Yaman raga.
We are all thankful to you
and always try to understand that there
is some sort of a drama that takes place
and that explains many things, you see.
All these coincidences are
done by this Divine Power.
So, it’s perfectly all right.
We all enjoyed your music very much.
We are all very thankful to you,
to give this tremendous joy
and I really felt Shri Ganesha
is dancing in your hearts.
That’s how it is worked
out because he’s innocence.
And he is the creator of the
whole rhythm of the world.
So, also today, they enjoyed your
music very much more, I should say,
and you also played very much in a more speed,
because of accompaniment of Sukhvinder Singh.
You see you, must always have
‘jod tour’ (alap), you see, yes.
You must have equally well
played tabla, otherwise,
the enjoyment is not so much,
you get sometimes bored.
But [Hindi] every moment was enjoyable.
So, it was my idea that you should bring him.
So, [Hindi conversation]
And we don’t understand,
they are organized for us.
Everything is
for us
and once we start realising
why these coincidences,
then you’ll be amazed that
it’s all done very meticulously
very effectively and efficiently
by this All-pervading Divine Power.
So, may God bless you.
May God bless you.
Thank you very much.